Justifying the Smallest Effect Size of Interest
===============================================

\label{justifying-the-smallest-effect-size-of-interest}

Equivalence tests are performed against a value that is considered the
smallest effect size of interest (SESOI). The SESOI can sometimes based
on just noticeable differences, which can be objectively determined.
Most often, however, it is a subjective decision that varies across
individuals and time. Both these approaches are valid, and even when a
just noticeable difference can be objectively determined, researchers
might choose to set the SESOI to a larger value. In many research areas,
the SESOI is best based on a cost-benefit analysis. Since both costs and
benefits are necessarily relative, the SESOI will depend on the
researcher who designs the study. The goal of setting a SESOI is to
clearly justify why designing a study that has a high probability of
rejecting effects larger than a specified value contributes to our
knowledge base. Researchers should not aim to determine a SESOI that is
universally valid. The goal is to set a SESOI such that inferences based
on it answer a meaningful question.

Objective Justifications of a SESOI
-----------------------------------

\label{objective-justifications-of-a-sesoi}

An objectively determined SESOI should be based on quantifiable
theoretical predictions, such as computational models. Sometimes, the
only theoretical prediction is that an effect should be noticeable. In
such circumstances, the SESOI can be set based on just noticeable
differences. For example, Burriss and colleagues ([**???** ]{}) examined
whether women displayed an increase in redness in the face during the
fertile phase of their ovulatory cycle. The hypothesis was that a
slighly redder skin signals greater attractiveness and physical health,
and sending this signal to men yields an evolutionary advantage. This
hypothesis requires that the increase in redness can be detected with
the naked eye by men. They collected data from 22 women and showed that
there was indeed an increase in redness of the facial skin of woman
during their fertile period. However, this increase was not large enough
to be noticeable with the naken eye by men, thus falsifying their
hypothesis. Because the just noticeable difference in redness of the
skin can be measured, it is possible to objectively establish the SESOI.

Another example of an objectively determined SESOI can be found in
([**???** ]{}) where the minimal clinically important difference on the
Beck Depression Inventory - II was determined by asking 1039 patients
when they subjectively felt less depressed (i.e., when they personally
noticed an improvement) and relating this to the corresponding
difference score on the depression inventory.

Subjective justifications of a SESOI
------------------------------------

\label{subjective-justifications-of-a-sesoi}

We distinguish between three categories of subjective justifications for
SESOI. First, researchers can use benchmarks. For example, one might set
the SESOI to a standardized effect size of d = 0.5, which would allow
one to reject effect as large or larger than a “medium” effect size
(Cohen, 1988). Similarly, effect sizes smaller than a Cohen’s d of 0.1
are sometimes considered trivially small (Maxwell, Lau, & Howard, 2015).
Relying on a benchmark is the weakest possible justification of a SESOI,
and should be avoided.

Second, researchers can determine the SESOI based on the literature.
Ideally, researchers would specify the SESOI in their research, but this
is not yet common practice. It is thus up to researchers who build on
earlier work to decide which effect size is too small to be meaningful,
given an earlier study. Simonsohn (2015) recently proposed to set the
SESOI to 33% of the effect size an earlier study could detect based on
the sample size. For example, consider a study where 100 participants
answered a question, which was analyzed with an one-sample t-test. For a
two-sided test with an alpha of .05 this test had 33% power to detect a
d = 0.15.

Another justifiable choice we would like to propose here is to use the
smallest observed effect size that could have been statistically
significant in the original study as the SESOI in a replication study.
Based only on the alpha level and the sample size, we can calculate the
criticial test value (e.g., *t* , *F* , *Z* ). This critical test value
can also be transformed to a standardized effect size (e.g.,
\(d = t \sqrt { \frac { 1} { n _ { 1} } + \frac { 1} { n _ { 2} } }\)), which can thus be interpreted as a *critical effect
size* . All observed effect sizes smaller than the critical effect size
would not be statistically significant in an original study, given the
alpha and sample size. By setting the SESOI to the critical effect size,
an equivalence test can reject all observed effect sizes that could have
been detected in an earlier study.

Third, researchers can set the SESOI based on the resources they have
available. The amount of data you can collect limits the inferences you
can make. Given a an alpha level and a sample size, researchers can
calculate the smallest effect size that can be rejected with the desired
power in an equivalence test. For example, a researcher who plans to
perform a two-sided one-sample t-test using an alpha of 5%, based on
data from 100 observations, has 90% power declare equivalence when
testing a SESOI of d = 0.33. Whether or not a test against a SESOI based
on the available resources contributes to the scientific literature
depends. One should not expect a test based on 11 observations, which
provides 90% power to reject effects larger than d = 1, is particularly
informative, given that most effects in psychology are substantially
smaller than d = 1. But by transparently reporting the effects one can
detect and reject, based on the study design, researchers can
communicate the information their study contributes.

\[
 _ { L } = \frac { M _ { 1} - M _ { 2} - \Delta _ { L } } { \sigma \sqrt { \frac { 1} { n _ { 1} } + \frac { 1} { n _ { 2} } } }, t _ { U } = \frac { M _ { 1} - M _ { 2} - \Delta _ { U } } { \sigma \sqrt { \frac { 1} { n _ { 1} } + \frac { 1} { n _ { 2} } } }

\]

Examples
--------

\label{examples}